[Music]
my dear brothers and sisters
so I just want to make a a quick you
know announcement right now that at the
end of the holoca we usually do three
questions uh and the sisters don't get
questions uh and the sisters don't ge
an opportunity to do that so this is
just a reminder for the sisters that if
you write down your questions at any
time you have a question and then send
them forward at the end of the inshallah
and I'll do three questions from the
brothers and three questions from the
sisters and that is how we will conclude
um so starting English
yesterday we discussed his principles at
yesterday we discussed his principles a
eighth and 8th and today we're going to
be discussing his biography and the way
I want to approach his biography was
rather than just reading about what
rather than just reading about wha
different Scholars said about him I
thought I would look at the major
segments of his life and then take
Monumental stories from those segments
and then try to derive lessons from them
and I found this to be the most cohesive
way so it's not going to be a detailed
discussion on you know what are the
different opinions of when he was born
and when he died and on the dramatic
details but more on you know the lessons
that we can learn from his life and they
will mention some brief detail else just
will mention some brief detail else jus
for the sake of discussion
this was his kunya his kunya was a title
that he was given and he was a custom of
the Arabs and the Muslims of that time
that they wouldn't call people by their
first name but rather they would call
them by their kunya so this was usually
given to you either because of a child
that you have or because of a
characteristic that you're known for
right so
known as the father of kittens because
he used to love kittens and play with
kittens
because he actually had a daughter named
hanifa he had a daughter named hanifa
now what was Imam Allah's real name his
real name was
[Music]
this was his lineage and his great
this was his lineage and his grea
grandfather was
now you'll find two different narrations
in terms of his name
the difference of opinion is on Zuta so
one opinion states there was a normal
zupa another opinion States it was a
normal
why does this difference of opinion
occur Scholars mentioned that zupa was
actually a non-muslim that accepted
Islam and when he accepted Islam he
changed his name to Norman he changed
his name to
Imam Allah was actually named after his
grandfather he was named after his
grandfather one was Imam Allah born
three opinions opinion number one 61
after Hijra opinion number two 80 after
Hijra opinion number three 86 after
Hijra the popular opinion amongst the
historians is that he was born in the
year 80.
he says the opinion closer to the truth
is that he was born in 86 after Hijra
because this is a direct narration from
his son this is a direct narration from
his son that he was born in 26 after
Hijra
he was born into a family of Muslims
already and they were businessmen they
used to sell silk a silk that is known
as khas so it was a very you know
particularly exclusive type of silk and
it was actually known to be a very good
commodity meaning that if you were in
this trade you were known to make a lot
this trade you were known to make a lo
of money now what did it mean for his
family at that time and this is perhaps
one of the first lessons you can derive
that at that time if you had money and
you were wealthy it means you learned
how to read and write and Muslims Muslim
family is the way they would teach their
children to read and to write was
through the Quran meaning he would start
through the Quran meaning he would star
off from a very young age memorized in
the Quran writing the Quran and learning
the Quran so a sign of wealth was were
you able to memorize the Quran or not
you able to memorize the Quran or no
because that is what the wealthy
children were doing so there are
actually many stories
used to go to the market he was seen
frequently reciting the Quran now this
is going to tie in towards the end of
the lecture when we were talking about
the lecture when we were talking abou
his qualities you know one of the
narrations mentions that he recited the
Quran 70 000 times in his life you want
Quran 70 000 times in his life you wan
to be wondering how is that going to be
possible well if you're sitting at work
day and night and if you don't have a
customer all you're doing is reading
Quran it becomes a lot more possible but
Quran it becomes a lot more possible bu
we'll discuss even then why there's some
doubt about this narration but we'll
leave that for the end of the lecture
but he was known as someone to love the
Quran even from a very young age now
we're going to start off with the first
we're going to start off with the firs
major section of his life and that was
as a student how did he come to love the
religion how did he become this great
religion how did he become this grea
Imam
was roughly between the age of 18 to 22.
when he is on his way to the market and
he meets this great Imam who was known
as ashabi and a shabby's real name was
Amir IBN so I shall be known as one of
the great imams of Hadith
he sees Imam Allah and he asks Imam
where are you going and he tells him I'm
going to the market and ashabi he says I
don't go to the market I only go to the
scholars
I don't spend much time with the
scholars unfortunately
so Imam he tells Imam that I see within
you intelligence and I see within you
foresight so why don't you go and spend
time with the scholars and see how you
like it and see how you like it
like it and see how you like i
narrates the story himself and he says
that was the turning point in my life
that I decided you know what I don't
that I decided you know what I don'
want to be just a businessman I wasn't
want to be just a businessman I wasn'
created just to be a businessman I have
to do something greater so remember from
that day decided to change you know the
direction of his life from businessman
to student of knowledge now what are
some of the lessons that you derive over
here lesson number one is
growing up was still just an average
young man there wasn't something
spectacular about him like you need Imam
bukhari's life you know from the age of
seven the guy is like memorizing
hundreds and thousands of Hadith
his life changed in his late teens in
his early twenties so it shows us that
his early twenties so it shows us tha
people have this kind conception that
people have this kind conception tha
you know what the only way you can
become a great scholar of Islam is if
you memorize the Quran by the age of
three but that's not the case
shows us that you can learn Islam at any
age you can change the direction of your
life at any time and there's always hope
and there's always room for that number
two
is never undermined the value of sincere
and good advice right we live in a day
and age where people don't want to give
advice and they don't want to hear
advice but I want you to think about
advice but I want you to think abou
this you know imagine there's like the
Twilight Zone where you have alternate
realities if a Shabby doesn't give this
advice
continues his line of business
imagine of the month of just got wiped
off the Earth right what percentage of
the Muslims attribute themselves to the
hanafi Mata
close to two-thirds of the Muslim
right directly or indirectly that means
you know they're on some other madhub
right now so this is the impact of just
right now so this is the impact of jus
one story right one piece of advice that
one story right one piece of advice tha
was so solid so sincere that it changes
the direction of humanity 1400 years
later and that's something we need to
understand and appreciate that number
one
let us bring back the Sunnah of giving
good advice you see potential in someone
encourage them advise them to strive
even better you see someone doing
something wrong don't hesitate to tell
them that you're doing something wrong
right I'll I'll mention the story of
something that happened to a friend of
mine today he's giving
and in this and of course reading the
magazine right
magazine righ
so I asked him you know did you go and
speak to the uncle after and he's like I
didn't get a chance to and in my mind so
many thoughts were going through my head
at that time that what if people looked
at this Uncle a young kid sees him and
he says you know what this Uncle is
reading a magazine why can't I just play
a game on my phone you know why can't I
text message why can't they do something
else
and imagine like the negative Legacy
that's being left behind so in these
sort of things someone may say advise
the uncle privately take him to the side
and tell him that he shouldn't be doing
this but in these sort of situations you
actually have to advise publicly because
the impact is public so if someone
advises you even publicly when you're
doing something public don't take it
doing something public don't take i
personally this is the dean of Allah
it's not about our egos it's not about
it's not about our egos it's not abou
our reputations in fact we only harm our
egos and our reputations when someone
advises us sincerely but we refuse to
listen so if someone gives you sincere
advice put your ego aside put what
advice put your ego aside put wha
people will think of you aside and judge
it analyze it is it good solid advice if
it is accept it if it isn't ask them and
propose to them how about X Y and Z but
propose to them how about X Y and Z bu
we should not live in a culture of you
can't judge me or Only God can judge me
you know Tupac made this statement so
famous and it's such a shaytani
statement people would not say only God
can judge me they only say that when
they know they're doing something wrong
right hashtag money God can judge me you
do that while you're doing something
silly no one says only God can judge me
when you're doing something good so
internally we know we're doing something
wrong when we're saying Only God can
judge me like you know that inside so
this culture of don't advise me only God
can advise me and God can judge me get
can advise me and God can judge me ge
rid of it we're brothers and sisters at
rid of it we're brothers and sisters a
the end of the day and in order for me
to get to Jannah I have to want you to
get to Jannah as well and you are a
reflection of me and I am a reflection
of you and this is what our community is
so if someone advises you accept it and
you do not know the impact it will have
like the story of ashabi on Imam
the second phase of his seeking
knowledge
so he's told go and seek
you know the scholars go and study with
them
Allah he goes and he looks at the
different talakat that are going on
and is provided with three options
option number one is which is the
equivalent of Akida at that time
is philosophy and it's the approach to
Akida through philosophical means number
two is Hadith and number three is silk
the first signs that Imam Allah falls in
love with right away is now let us
understand the context of this him
living in kufa at that time
kufa used to be you know a Christian
Central at that time they were Christian
missionaries that used to come so before
his time sorry not in this time but
his time sorry not in this time bu
before his time it was Christian
Missionary land so lots of Christians
used to come there likewise Greek
philosophers came as well and they
propagated there as well then Islam
finally comes and with that various
denominations and sects come as well it
denominations and sects come as well i
is like the capital of the khawaris it
is like the capital of the khawaris i
is the capital of the matazida it is
soon to become the capital of the Shia
all of these things are happening at
all of these things are happening a
that time
a philosophical
is like the main Hot Topic and you'll
notice that even on social media when
someone shares like
how many people you know like it and
shared not too many someone shares like
a spiritual quote you'll get more people
that like it but as soon as one scholar
starts debating another everyone's
talking about it everyone's commenting
everyone has an opinion and that's what
everyone has an opinion and that's wha
was like it was one scholar debating
another egors are there you know
intelligent arguments are brought back
and forth very appealing very
interesting so this is
attracted to right away
but pretty soon he realizes that this
isn't bringing me closer to Allah
but this Foundation was so important for
him this is what made him intelligent
him this is what made him intelligen
and as I mentioned yesterday one of the
unique qualities
was his ability to hypothesize fic right
was his ability to hypothesize fic righ
30 to 60 000 issues he hypothesized in
his life that didn't take place yet just
his life that didn't take place yet jus
so that when the time came the ummah
would have an answer to those questions
it came from his studying of illum but
it came from his studying of illum bu
he eventually abandoned it because he
realized that there was no benefit in it
realized that there was no benefit in i
as well he tried the science of Hadith
but in that too he found it was a very
meticulous science meaning very detailed
and didn't appeal to his heart so he
didn't criticize it like he criticized
but with Hadith it just didn't appeal to
him and then he finally finds the
scholars of and there's one particular
scholariman
and he was perhaps the greatest
and he was perhaps the greates
influencer of Imam Allah he says as soon
as they saw Hamad I fell in love with
his character before I fell in love with
his silk that he was such an easy going
guy very supportive guy any problems I
had he would always love and care for me
and this is what attracted me to
and this shows us that in order to
become a good teacher in order to become
a good leader people will always be
attracted to your character first before
they are attracted to what you have to
say and that is how you win the hearts
of Royal people and I reflect over my
own journey of the teachers in Medina
that I'm still in touch with
it wasn't because they were the most
it wasn't because they were the mos
knowledgeable there were Scholars that
knowledgeable there were Scholars tha
were much much more knowledgeable than
them but what made my heart attached to
them until this day I still stay in
touch with them was the care the genuine
care that they showed me that anytime I
had a problem anytime I didn't
had a problem anytime I didn'
understand something they would take me
by the hand and help me understand in
fact one of my teachers you know he
teaches hundreds of students every day
if I was ever absent from class he would
send another student to find out why I
was absent and it was like one of those
situations where you know imagine you
don't show up the class the teacher
actually announces you know where is so
and so you're embarrassed next session
like the teacher called you out and you
weren't there right that's how it was
but that was one of them him wanting to
embarrass me or any of the other
students but it was from the genuine
care that he had and this is what you
see with Hamad as well
for her genuine care and his character
he starts developing a complex Insight
he starts developing a complex Insigh
that I've been studying for 10 years
when is my opportunity to become a
teacher ever going to come right for 10
years he's in his you know 30s right now
if not you know late 20s he's like I'm
an old man now when am I going to start
an old man now when am I going to star
teaching when is my opportunity going to
come
so inside of himself he makes the
intention that tonight I'm going to go
and tell Hamad that I want to start up
my own halaka and I'm no longer going to
study with him and as soon as he arrives
in the holoca and I want you to think
about this is does he have the right
about this is does he have the righ
intention should we make intentions to
become teachers should We crave
leadership to want to become in the
public eye think about that for a second
at that night when he goes to approach
Hamad Hamad tells him that one of his
relatives passed away in basava
and that he left behind an inheritance
and Hamad is the only inheritor so Hamad
has to travel to basila and there's no
one to teach the halaka can you teach
the halaka for me on that very night
the halaka for me on that very nigh
what are the chances right
what are the chances righ
he taught the halaka for the next couple
of months is nowhere to be seen but what
of months is nowhere to be seen but wha
is
he just get on the chair and you know
okay folks I'm taking over this is my
halaka now we're going to completely
Shuffle things up completely change it
Shuffle things up completely change i
over you know I'm the man now any
questions you have come to me that's not
questions you have come to me that's no
how it worked
he was asked 60 Questions during that
he was asked 60 Questions during tha
time and every time someone asked him a
question he would write down the
question and write down the answer
waiting for what that when Hamad would
come back he would check with his
teacher was my answer right or was it
teacher was my answer right or was i
wrong and he says when Hamad came back I
showed him my 60 answers which he agreed
with me on 40 and he disagreed with me
on 20. and at that time I realized I
still had so much more to learn
so I continued to stay with him and I
made the intention to stay with him till
he died and he stayed with him for
another eight years so all together he
was with him for 18 years
now just from that component what are
the lessons you derive number one is the
importance of you know having
aspirations in life right we were
talking about
talking abou
make the right decision of wanting to
become the teacher
and the answer is we're generally taught
and the answer is we're generally taugh
that Muslims shouldn't claim leadership
right you shouldn't strive to become the
leader when is that the case
as Muslims we shouldn't strive for
leadership when there's someone more
qualified than us
we shouldn't strive for leadership when
Our intention is purely for ourselves
and not for the sake of the dean of
Allah
when he's wanting the chair to teach
it's about his opportunity to teach the
people it's not about him being
recognized as a scholar and we see that
recognized as a scholar and we see tha
by him checking his answers with his
teacher it was true about him he could
have said you know forget Hamad I'm the
teacher now who cares what Muhammad says
I don't need to check my answers but it
I don't need to check my answers but i
was about his opportunity to teach and
his opportunity also to learn so people
have to be given opportunity right when
there's potential you need to give
opportunity and we notice that
opportunity and we notice tha
subhanallah sometimes when your
intention is right and you don't know
how to approach that subject Allah makes
the world for you like you can imagine
what difficult conversation that would
be with Imam
I'm really sorry but I want to start up
my own I hope you don't mind it's going
to be an awkward conversation
[Music]
saving him from that awkward
conversation
then number three is the importance of
always checking your knowledge right we
live in such a dangerous age and I'm
gonna come back to this I mentioned in
last week the Halal food group that I'm
on in uh and on Facebook in Vancouver
even just like two or three days ago a
sister posted hey by the way I heard
Doritos and Cheetos are Haram what do
you guys think and again I wanted to
just go in like guns blazing what's
wrong with you people why are you sing
for tawa from Layman on Facebook in a
food group right this is not the place
to ask your fit questions but I I don't
to ask your fit questions but I I don'
want to start fit now and one and two I
want my lesson there's no such thing as
a productive debate on Facebook people
chime in and it's like a full-fledged
War whether allegiances and takfir is
made and is made and no one wins and
shaytan wins at the end of the day
but again the point being
understanding that there's a place and a
time to learn and the place and time to
learn is from the scholars from your
teachers not just from any job law
number two is that even as an old man
not as an old man but as not as a Young
Man anymore
don't feel so confident that you know
everything right there's always
opportunity to learn and there's always
room for growth so any opportunity you
have to learn and grow take advantage of
that and this is something you know I
loved about the culture in Medina that
loved about the culture in Medina tha
when you look at the Quran the teacher
could be like some 18 20 year old God
and then you'll have like a 60 70 year
old man come in reading Quran to him
just not for the sake of you know
wanting to show off but for the sake of
hey maybe you know something that I
don't or maybe you can correct my
memorization or maybe you can correct my
attitude or you can correct something on
my behalf and this is something I want
my behalf and this is something I wan
us all to develop that you're never too
old to learn and always adopt that
old to learn and always adopt tha
mentality no opportunity should go by
except that I'm learning from it right
except that I'm learning from it righ
your whole life is an opportunity to
learn either from the lessons that Allah
teaches you through life or through you
taking advantage by reading and studying
and sitting with Scholars and teachers
all of life should be full focused on
learning and studying and this is what
learning and studying and this is wha
Imam of Honey foreign
as a student
as a studen
now we learn later on that as he was a
student and as he becomes a great
student and as he becomes a grea
teacher himself
continued to do business and how did
that work exactly he had a business
partner by the name of hafs Bin Abdul
Rahman
foreign
but he recognized that he was nowhere as
intelligent nowhere as clever as Imam
Allah
look we've been doing business for a
very long time and clearly you are very
good at knowledge right you excelled
this and I don't
this and I don'
so why don't you leave the business
aspirations to me and you go and study
full-time and I will support you
now this story of support and
Brotherhood is so remarkable subhanallah
I want you to think that if your
business partners with someone and your
business partner says hey by the way I'm
going to go and study the dean of Allah
can you please look after the business
the natural reaction we would have you
want me to do all the work while you go
and chill and play right that's the
reaction we would have like that's just
reaction we would have like that's jus
normal
but this is like a remnants it shows us
that the time of the setup is completely
different from our times where this
business partner he's trustworthy he's
telling him that look
let me hand over business I have this
under control you have the knowledge
under the control and this is my
opportunity to seek Aja like like this
even though he claims he's not a scholar
what he just did is a scholarly act
what he just did is a scholarly ac
because number one he's taking care of
his Dunya his business is under control
number two is that he's giving him Allah
the opportunity to study so he's getting
from that number three is that he's
financially supporting Imam Allah as
well this is like
success upon success upon success
couldn't have asked for anything more
now people know the name of them but
now people know the name of them bu
they don't know the name of
but everything that Imam Allah went to
put forward
he was only able to do
because
and this shows us that each and every
one of us has our roles in this room
today it is not possible that everyone
in this room will be a scholar it is not
in this room will be a scholar it is no
possible that everyone will be a doctor
it's not possible everyone will be an
engineer each and every one of us has a
roles and we have to be supportive of
one another
but that's support in particular has to
become has to come towards our people of
knowledge and those people have
potential so I was telling you last week
about how many young people grew up with
the aspirations of becoming an Imam or a
student of knowledge hardly anyone
because they know the reality and they
know the lack of support
know the lack of suppor
right that is this reality of the
situation but imagine if someone has the
zero to go and study and they're afraid
how will I support myself how will I
support my family and we actually have
like a trust fund for those people we
have individuals in the community that
have individuals in the community tha
say you know what Allah has blessed me
with so much money why don't you go and
study in any Financial concerns you have
I'll take care of them while you're
studying that would be such a smart
studying that would be such a smar
business decision not only would Allah
definitely put product in that business
but everything that this young man or
young woman learns that you're
supporting you're getting the Azure for
and this is showing us know your role
and support knowledge and the people of
knowledge in any way that you can if you
can't become a person of knowledge love
the people of knowledge and support them
this is what our predecessors used to
say right and this is what we see from
now why did Hafiz
[Music]
so much like where did this passion
particularly towards him
I want to share with you three
particular stories of him doing business
the first of them Allah
as a buyer when he's buying something
so I want you to imagine
you know the iPhone 8 is going to be
coming out soon
and you have this individual that just
and you have this individual that jus
came back from like let's just say
Malaysia they come from Malaysia and
they're standing outside the Masjid
after jummah and they're like salam
alaikum everyone I'm selling the iPhone
8. for 150 right for 150 what is your
natural reaction what are you gonna do
you'll buy it for sure you don't buy it
you'll buy it for sure you don't buy i
why are you not gonna buy it you think
it's a scam excellent that's what I want
it's a scam excellent that's what I wan
to hear what else do we have anyone else
so you have someone who says buy it for
sure and everyone says don't buy it
sure and everyone says don't buy i
because it's a scam what are you gonna
do what else
buy it and then sell it for more right
buy it and then sell it for more righ
then we have a businessman mashallah
fantastic buy it with that G price go on
the Kijiji sell it for something higher
any other opinions anyone's just say buy
it and use it right I'm sure that even
though we're not saying it a lot of us
would buy the phone see if it's real
first if it's real buy it and use it
first if it's real buy it and use i
that's what we would end up doing 150 is
too good of a deal to give up
Allah came across a woman that was
selling a particular type of silk very
expensive
so he asks her how much is this she says
it is a hundred Dirhams he says that's
too little that's it's worth much much
more
so she says fine you know I'll increase
it by a bit
it by a bi
he says that's still too little like
you're undervaluing your commodity so
much
the one becomes very offended she's like
are you making fun of me like do you
think I'm not one business
look I'm not making fun of you but this
is my concern for you as a as a merchant
is my concern for you as a as a merchan
and as a Muslim that I don't want you to
get ripped off so if you don't if you
don't believe me why don't we get
don't believe me why don't we ge
someone else to come and assess the
value of this silk and let them suggest
value of this silk and let them sugges
a price so a person comes who values the
silk and he says this is at least worth
400 dirhams
he says are you satisfied and she says
you know I am shocked I'm surprised I
didn't know this
gave her 500 Dirhams took the silk and
he walked away and this shows his
honesty in buying like even the story is
so perplexing like if you look at the
various answers we had one's like okay
maybe she's scamming him the circle silk
is fake and I was like okay buy it right
is fake and I was like okay buy it righ
away and sell it for something higher
he's like I want to give you your fair
market price for this I don't want you
to be ripped off now what does this
remind me of
when I was very young like perhaps not
when I was very young like perhaps no
very young but like 13 14 years old I
was attending a halakhan Brotherhood
and the person that was presenting he
was reading from the um
starts talking about the breakdown of
andalus that why did this great Muslim
empire end up collapsing and he says
what I noticed the grass the most
what I noticed the grass the mos
drastic difference in was in the market
drastic difference in was in the marke
that in the success of the Muslim ummah
if you went to the marketplace and
people were telling you that go and buy
from someone else his prices are better
and his quality is better you'll find a
better deal over there that is how when
the people was thriving and towards the
end when the ummah was about to collapse
the Empire is about to collapse
people will get the worst of the
products maximize their profits hide the
defects and lie about the qualities and
they will say don't buy from anyone else
I have the best products and I have the
best prices and it is at that time that
best prices and it is at that time tha
the Empire collapsed
is doing this contrast and when you look
at this that when you have the likes
showing what it was like to be alive
during the time of the salaf you
understand what that time was like like
who in our age would remind someone hey
you know charge of your price with us
you're charging too little
number two a romance can't once came to
him and said I am weak and I put myself
in your hands meaning that I have no
clothes or I have just barely enough and
I need to buy some clothes so I'm
putting all of my trust in you send me
this garment for what it costs you so
sell me this garment for cost price
that's what she's asking Imam hanifa he
says take it for four Dirhams Surya
toward it do not mock me I am an old
woman that meaning have some shame have
some respect I'm older than you why are
you making fun of me he said I bought
you making fun of me he said I bough
two garments and sold one of them for
the cost of both
less for their humps and thus I'm
selling a tea for four dirhams I mean at
selling a tea for four dirhams I mean a
that time
Allah he had two garments right one of
them he had already sold and he had one
lef
so the price that he saw the first
so the price that he saw the firs
government for was the price of both of
them combined meaning he made a lot of
profit on the first government so much
so that all he had to do was sell the
second government for fourth Dirhams and
he breaks even
Allah he could have said five Dirhams
could have said ten Dirhams
Mercy he on this elderly woman she
needed the Garment he didn't seek to
take advantage of her and at that time
he sold it to her for four of their
homes
this is the Second Story the third story
is a very particular story
he had three students that excelled he
had Abu Yusuf Muhammad
these are his three top students
he was actually you know the one that
he was actually you know the one tha
ends up becoming you know the judge of
judges in his time so he he was just
judges in his time so he he was jus
amazing mashallah
our Yusuf he will say nothing for him
Allah in the sense that he ended up
finding Islam later on through the
benevolence and kindness of Imam of
hanifa but whenever Yusuf wanted to
study Islam our yusuf's parents were not
study Islam our yusuf's parents were no
happy
right they're like we're poor people we
don't have enough money and you want to
go and study Islam you're going to make
us even more poor
so what did you remember
Allah blessed him with money
he says double Yusuf that as long as you
continue to study
I will continue to support you
and your family so we paid not only for
the expenses of Abu Yusuf but for the
expensive household and the parents
they're like you know who knew that
they're like you know who knew tha
Islam would bring so much honor and
dignity to our household and this is
something again
that a lot of parents have this fear
that if my son or daughter seeks a path
of religiosity and they end up becoming
a student of knowledge or becoming Imam
becoming they're destined to be poor and
this is like something that you know
when I was deciding to become it go to
Medina there's like a concern my parents
had this or what do you want to do after
and this is where we often forget
and this is where we often forge
this is the dean of Allah and when you
sacrifice anything for the sake of Allah
Allah will always take care of you there
has never been an instance in history
and Humanity that a person sincerely
sacrifices something for the Deen of
Allah
accept that Allah replaces it with
something better
and that is the reality so we used to
when he made that firm decision that I
want to dedicate myself to studying the
Deen Allah
a great teacher as well as someone
benevolent who used to support him and
his family and he did this for 10 years
for 10 years just continue to support
for 10 years just continue to suppor
him
and I think to myself subhanallah
firstly we're thinking about finding
someone
to help the students of knowledge have a
trust fund find rich people to support
trust fund find rich people to suppor
the students of knowledge but imagine if
we had this amazing opportunity where
our imams our Scholars were financially
literate
bless them with money so that they could
support their own students because this
story with Abu Yusuf you find out much
much later on after the death of
remember hanifa that it didn't just
remember hanifa that it didn't jus
happen to abusive in fact the vast
happen to abusive in fact the vas
majority of students
he is financially supporting them that
he is financially supporting them tha
don't work don't worry about being
distracted I will take care of you and
this again like you know
then you have Allah
you know every great other Adam that
you know every great other Adam tha
came after is indebted to this that Imam
Allah not only taught them but
Allah not only taught them bu
financially supported them as well
and what I want to emphasize over here
is broadening your scope of Ajar when we
think about ajar let's fast let's read
Quran let's pray
have intelligent
have intelligen
faith-based Investments intelligent
faith-based Investments intelligen
faith-based Investments investing in
human beings that show potential and
just take them as far as you can mentor
them as much as you can financially
support them as much as you can fulfill
their potential when they achieve it not
their potential when they achieve it no
only are you getting the ajir but you
get to see the fruits of it right he
gets to see the fruits of his labor with
his students so now let's move on to the
third stage
his life and that was his interaction
with political parties interaction with
political parties
so for the best
it was mentioned around 52 years of the
United Dynasty he lived as for the
Ambassador Dynasty
if we take and this is I want to see how
many of you are paying attention
if we take the opinion that he died in
86 actually that's going to be too
difficult I want to have mercy on you
guys it's after Asia I won't quiz you
but I'll just give you the answer so if
you take the opinion that he was born in
86 then he lived 12 years under the
arrested rule if you take the opinion
that he was born in 80 then he lived 18
years under the Abbasid rule so this is
how his political time is is broken down
later faces of the Umayyads he saw the
collapse the rise of the abbasids he got
collapse the rise of the abbasids he go
to witness that as well now as is the
case of every great Adam as I mentioned
they never supported or went against any
political party but rather they would
create their own advice their own
structure telling people what is right
structure telling people what is righ
and wrong without supporting any
political party because they didn't want
political party because they didn't wan
their religion to be tainted nor their
um you know Legacy to be tainted
so now the first scholar that he has a
conflict with was
Dynasty and I want to show you this
man's intelligence honestly this man is
he comes and he says invite all the
scholars of kufa so all the scholars of
kufa and two other huge scorers
these are two big Scholars
contemporaries that remember hanifa but
contemporaries that remember hanifa bu
only the people of knowledge will know
who they are but again contemporaries
big Scholars he says all of you are now
officially hired by the state and I want
officially hired by the state and I wan
you all to become judges and to issue
fatawa and before any judgment is
decreed
is going to put the seal of approval
image
he says no I'm not doing this because
again he didn't want to be directly tied
to politics it retained his legacy
did to get out of it
did to get out of i
he says I am not qualified
what does the Khalifa respond the
governor of Cuba respond he says you are
a liar
he says I have won because either I'm a
liar and I will disqualify what's
qualifying for being a judge or what
qualifying for being a judge or wha
I've said is the truth and then you
would agree that I'm not qualified
therefore I can't become the judge
what does the the governor do straight
what does the the governor do straigh
to jail you know it's like Monopoly go
straight to jail you're not coming out
straight to jail you're not coming ou
and that's what ended up happening
spent a long period of time in prison
until someone finally came and
interceded and said look
is a very nice man we know nothing but
is a very nice man we know nothing bu
pray for him why don't you let him out
pray for him why don't you let him ou
of prison
on the condition that he doesn't stay in
kufa
he thinks about it for a bit and he says
fine we'll do that
fine we'll do tha
has to leave
is this a good thing or a bad thing a
bad thing it's a good thing well let's
look at what happened remember the
Hadith
he says everything that befalls a
Believer is good if God befalls him he
is patient and this is good for him and
if God be follows him he says
alhamdulillah and this is good for him
Allah when he's in prison he's giving
dawah to the people and the like the
princes are becoming you know that's
what's happening in prison
it's out of prison but he's exiled from
his community he gets sent you know
where does he decide to go he decides to
go to Makkah and when he goes to Mecca
he ends up spending six years there and
in this six years he ends up in his own
words he said I learned the school of
Ali I learned the school of um I learned
the school of IBN Abbas and I learned
the school of even Masood
so when he decided to go to Makkah not
so when he decided to go to Makkah no
only is much much older in age right
only is much much older in age righ
he's still continuing to learn but had
he stayed in kufa he wouldn't have been
able to develop his filth even further
to learn from the of these great four
sahaba obviously he didn't meet these
four sahaba themselves but from your
students he got to learn of what their
opinions were and that is why a lot of
the times when you see the image
which two great sahabras is it based
upon
and occasionally you'll get IBN abbasa
occasionally but a lot of it
occasionally but a lot of i
that was a result of him going tamakkah
now something that I want to comment
now something that I want to commen
over here
when we talk about the salaf you have
three main stages you have the sahaba
you have the table eight and you have
the atibat tab so the first generation
is a Saba contemporaries of the Prophet
is a Saba contemporaries of the Prophe
Muhammad
they are the students of the sahaba and
the atib they are the students of the
tabirin okay
he was alive during the time of several
sahaba honest
sahaba hones
was still alive at that time right
the last sahabi to die he was alive
during that time
while he lived in their age he didn't
while he lived in their age he didn'
actually get to meet them and that is
why he is considered from the advantage
that is why he's considered from the
advantage a second point I forgot to
mention over here his father Sabbath
may Allah bless you and your progeny and
he presumed that
he presumed tha
was answered with Imam Allah came
through with the Dua of Imam
so that is his first incident now things
finally sort of calmed down the umayya
Dynasty is out of power Imam Allah
decides to come back to kufa
this becomes huge news this great exiled
Imam is now back the closest thing that
Imam is now back the closest thing tha
I can think of is think of Nelson
Mandela the man's in prison political
Strife is over he is now released he
ends up becoming you know president of
his country that's what he was similar
to Allah comes back to kufa okay this
great Imam is back everything's gonna
change for the better
but who's gonna ruin it for him the new
governor of kufa al-mansoor
having Strife with his wife
what is his wife complaining about you
have too many women in your life
so he calls him Allah and he tells him
sorry rather asks his wife who do you
want to judge between us
and she says I've heard of this great
and she says I've heard of this grea
knowledgeable
let him come and judge between us so
al-mansoor he thinks he's a very clever
guy he's everybody
he's like you know I'm a clever guy I'm
the Khalifa I can easily play and please
excuse my language this fool that's how
he's thinking in talking about Imam
hanifa
comes and he says I'm here to you know
solve this dispute
please Governor go ahead and present
please Governor go ahead and presen
your case
so the governor presents his case
by questioning he says
how many women is a man allowed to marry
he says for
he says how many slave girls is a man
allowed to have
the Sheikh response there's no the the
the texts haven't specified a particular
number
can anyone change this ruling can anyone
change the number of wives can anyone
change a number of saves he says no one
can do that the returns to his wife this
dispute is over you know Imam has judged
in my favor right that's how he played
the situation
and it sounds a lot more beautiful
in Arabic he ends up quoting the verse
from
Allah
he says
right and if you fear that you will not
right and if you fear that you will no
be able to do justice or you know you're
not going to be able to do justice then
you have to do one
that you can only marry one wife and
only have one woman in your life
and I have without a shadow of a doubt
and I have without a shadow of a doub
just seen from this discussion that
just seen from this discussion tha
you're not someone that does Justice and
my ruling is that you can only have one
wife and only one woman
this Khalifa is just like what happened
right like I'm thinking I'm screwing the
guy he just screwed me
so smooth
walks out the door before anything else
can happen right he's learned from his
last incident before the Khalifa can say
imposing him he's like let me take off
now how does this story end well the
wife of al-mansour she sends a large
tray of gold she sends him uh you know
riding beast and she sent him something
else I can't remember what the third
thing was but she sends him to these
three things
he tells the messenger that please
convey my Salam to her and let her know
that he cannot accept this gift for it
that he cannot accept this gift for i
would tarnish my Deen it would tarnish
my reputation and this after he's
already issued the verdict meaning it's
not that he issued the word because he
knew he was going to get this after he's
issued it he realizes that look there's
only a certain type of gift from whom
you can accept and when you can accept
you can accept and when you can accep
and I can't accept this and this teaches
us so much that people need to be
smart if someone is giving you a gift
smart if someone is giving you a gif
particularly in political power question
that why is this person giving me a gift
that why is this person giving me a gif
how is this going to affect my
reputation and not every gift is worth
accepting right so always be cautious of
that now this is how the story with
al-man Sur starts off so very bad
beginning to this relationship and the
ending was actually much much worse
that later on again
the way he politically portrays himself
he claims to be a leader of the people
he claims to be a leader of Allah
abiding by the Quran and the Sunnah
so again now it comes time to appoint
so again now it comes time to appoin
you know the chief judge there's no one
more qualified than Imam Allah so again
he summons Imam Allah
and he tells him look you know whether
you like it or not I'm going to make you
the judge like there's nothing you can
do about it like no discussion
Allah he refused he's like look there's
nothing that you can do that will make
me want to become judge and he says I
will not become the judge
you will become the judge a clash of ego
well not egos but from one suicide it
well not egos but from one suicide i
became an ego and foreign
because he didn't want you to do this
so the Khalifa he imprisons him and he
orders him lashes 10 lashes every day
and after the 11 days are over like for
11 days of continuous lashing the person
that's whipping him is like I felt
that's whipping him is like I fel
ashamed that this is the Imam this is
the Sheikh that I'm whipping and you
know what type of human being am I sorry
I can't do this anymore you have to find
someone else to do this
and at that time the Khalifa is like you
know what let him be and I want to pause
over here just for a moment I want to
read something to you from Allah
ah
okay so the fact that
okay so the fact tha
cried when he spoke about his flogging
and prayed for Allah's Mercy on him and
did so after he himself was beaten by
the state for other reasons shows the
affection and regard that Ahmed had for
his predecessor this shows that he had
gotten past the old rivalry that existed
between the school of Hadith that his
school was one example of and the school
of opinion that imam's legal school
exemplified so there's lessons over here
as well just to quickly
mentioned later on he himself was abused
and he recognized that pain right that
and he recognized that pain right tha
he was literally he would get so abused
he would pass out from the torture and
then he would be abused again so when he
heard about Imam hanifa and every time
he would mention you know this story he
would cry and he would weep and he would
make Dua foreign
between the school of Hadith and the
school of the school of opinion that he
got past that and he understood that
got past that and he understood tha
this Deen is much bigger than our own
individual opinions that's Imam Muhammad
now I want to share
he says the fact that one of our great
he says the fact that one of our grea
Scholars and jurists would be publicly
flogged for refusing a Judicial judicial
post is a black moment in our history it
post is a black moment in our history i
undermines the freedom and dignity of
the scholar moreover how can a legal
scholar be detained in the street and
beaten before the eyes of the very
people he is being asked to judge
between
that I want you to understand this is
what they're saying that is a very dark
moment in our history because people
don't understand the ramifications you
want this person to become the the
leader or sorry the
the judge in your community but you're
going to publicly flog him do you think
people are going to respect his opinion
or you know show any sort of reverence
to his opinion when he's being publicly
flogged you're humiliating him and you
want people to recognize his success it
want people to recognize his success i
doesn't work like that so you know I
thought this is a very nice quote from
uh
So eventually this story concludes
spends the rest of his life in prison
and he's teaching the people in prison
and there's three different versions as
to how he passes away
number one that he just passes away in
prison naturally number two that
prison naturally number two tha
al-mansoor he realized that Imam isn't
al-mansoor he realized that Imam isn'
passing away anytime soon and with the
presence of remember honey from him
constantly giving down on the prisons
this is tarnishing the public opinion of
al-mansoor so what does he decide to do
let me poison
[Music]
and just kill him off quickly so that
and just kill him off quickly so tha
the damage can be under control opinion
number three is
eventually released and he ends up dying
at home
all three of these opinions have Merit
all three of these opinions have Meri
and clout in terms of their chains of
narration and Allah Knows Best in terms
of what happened but clearly he died as
a result of one of these three things in
the time of Allah in the year 150 in the
year 150.
how are you guys feeling right now are
you guys tired
can you guys handle another 10 minutes
is that one okay with 10 more minutes
inshallah in 10 more minutes we'll
conclude because I just have two
sections to discuss with you number one
the qualities
like some of the qualities I quickly
want to
actually you know what let's do the
other one first the disclaimer and the
disclaimer is the extreme praise and
criticism that we find about Imam
right so in terms of the criticism you
find you know many criticisms that Imam
Allah had number one is his overuse of
kriyas we discussed this yesterday in
class but this has no merit to it
you know conditions were accepting the
Sunnah were so strict in terms of
wanting to protect his religion he had
to resort to a lot of use of toyas
number two is his limited knowledge of
Hadith and in fact what was the station
in Hadith
to be a weak narrator in Hadith but
to be a weak narrator in Hadith bu
understand that this does not mean much
this does not mean much why because even
most of the major reciters right the
different the imams of this are
considered weak according to bukhari and
Muslim so just because someone is
considered weak it doesn't mean it
considered weak it doesn't mean i
tarnishes your reputation but in defense
of this
an authentic narrator number three in
terms of the number of Hadith
reported you'll find some reports that
reported you'll find some reports tha
say he only narrated or he only knew 17
Hadith this is preposterous absolutely
Preposterous How could a person be an
Imam of Islam and only know 17 Hadith
like I said when we studied this
yesterday
he had emotional that roughly has about
he had emotional that roughly has abou
215 Hadith later on it had 300 or even
more than that but he knew at least 200
Hadith that he used as evidence what was
beyond that Allah was Best But as
evidence we have roughly around 215. so
the fact that he only knew like a
limited amount is not something
disappears with we discussed this
yesterday number one he lived before the
time of evolution of Hadith
didn't happen
they weren't compiled anymore he lived
before that time so he couldn't be
responsible number two his
specialization is in silk it's not in
Hadith right
Hadith righ
defends him against this saying that a
man who is not specialized in this why
are you criticizing him for it you can't
are you criticizing him for it you can'
criticize someone just because not
criticize someone just because no
specialize in the field that you want
specialize in the field that you wan
him to be specialized in number three
the accused him
is a theological uh deviance where it's
most basic understanding is actions are
not a part of Iman I'm not going to go
into the details of it this is something
that he's accused of Imam IBN Abdullah
the great Maliki scholar comes you know
200 and somewhat years after Imam hanifa
he says this is something that is
may have had in his early stages where
he's studying but it is something that
he's studying but it is something tha
he retracted later on in his life and
his
protagonists only mentioned it as a way
of disparging him meaning that they try
to make it as if it's something current
to make it as if it's something curren
that this is something that he died upon
but in reality there's something that he
repented from and then he had left and
this is something that he is free from
these are his criticisms now he also has
extreme Praises he also has extreme
Praises which I want to share with you
there's two incidents over here
number one and I I'll just read from the
statements of uh he's
where he said it is known that Imam
Allah for 4 straight years offered the
Fajr Salah in the morning with the same
will do that he made for Isha at night
will do that he made for Isha at nigh
for the consecutive years he prayed Fajr
that he made Isha this is the first part
that he made Isha this is the first par
he would recite the Quran completely in
a single raka and his Weeping at night
a single raka and his Weeping at nigh
would be heard by his neighbors who used
to feel sorry for what they thought was
his distress it is also known that in uh
in the place where he passed away he had
read the Quran 70 000 times so this is
the statement of again perspective is
weak right we don't accept his
narrations
saying that this narration
praying with the
Fajr it still exists in this time right
Fajr it still exists in this time righ
I don't know if I should mention this
but there's a very famous book that
but there's a very famous book tha
people from the subcontinent use that
people from the subcontinent use tha
heavily Advocates this that you know he
prayed you know uh with the uh
and they even exaggerate even more that
and they even exaggerate even more tha
when you make when the people you should
make wudu and the water used to fall off
there Imam
which of their sins were being forgiven
like complete ridiculous exaggeration
right stupidity
so that is the first part the second
narration he says and I feel the same
about the following claim made by one of
abhinifa's sons when my father died we
asked
to undertake the washing of his body he
agreed and while he was washing him he
said may Allah have mercy on you and may
He forgive you you fasted for 30 years
straight and you did not lay down at
straight and you did not lay down a
night to sleep for the past 40 years you
have set a difficult example for those
who came after you and have put the
Quran with ciders to shame
he comments on this now saying these two
claims contain a good bit of
exaggeration Islam does not teach us to
stay up throughout the night Allah
instructed the prophet salallahu alaihi
wasallam saying stand in prayer at night
wasallam saying stand in prayer at nigh
except for a little bit half of it or a
little more or a little less
and recite the Quran in clear measured
tones
the prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam
would observe for part of the night and
he would sleep for another portion of it
he would sleep for another portion of i
this is what His companion said about
this is what His companion said abou
him including IBN abbasa and Aisha many
comments that if someone wanted to read
the Quran 70 000 times and he continued
to do this
how long would he need to do this just
how long would he need to do this jus
in a continuous state roughly around 200
years
so it's not physically possible that
so it's not physically possible tha
Imam Allah could have done this
but he says there are other narrations
that mention that he recited the Quran 7
000 times and from the stories that we
know about hanifa this is something that
know about hanifa this is something tha
was very doable due to him loving the
Quran even before he became a student of
knowledge so seven thousand times is
more realistic and this is a huge
achievement now two things that I want
achievement now two things that I wan
to conclude with after we've given that
to conclude with after we've given tha
disclaimer that you know obviously it
disclaimer that you know obviously i
was exaggeration on both sides and what
was exaggeration on both sides and wha
both parties say about image does not
both parties say about image does no
affect him Allah reached such a great
affect him Allah reached such a grea
station of Imam that any form of
criticism or exaggerated praise does not
criticism or exaggerated praise does no
affect his station as in Imam now what I
want to conclude with was one beautiful
statement of two other great imams about
statement of two other great imams abou
him
and this is about
and this is abou
use his tongue so we mentioned that Imam
Allah came under constant criticism
so who's making the statement
so who's making the statemen
foreign
[Music]
like he's such a high level caliber of a
scholar
he's telling Sophia and Authority
another
Hadith major huge scholar of his own
Rank and title
never backbites anyone I never once
heard him say something bad about any of
his opponents
sufyan replied he is far too sensible to
subject his virtuous Deeds to that which
would cancel them out
would cancel them ou
so what is amazing about this narration
is the way two other amazing imams are
speaking about Imam
now I want you to understand this title
of Hadith has roughly been given four or
five times throughout history two of
those individuals
are having a discussion who are they
speaking about
so his legacy was the production of
great Scholars of Hadith from them
what are they speaking about they're
speaking about that the true character
of an Adam is in the way that he uses
his tongue
that when someone criticizes you when
someone disparges you when someone says
something bad about you
how do you respond
he says I never heard him backed by
anyone and the safarian authority says
obviously he wouldn't do that because
he's too sensible he's too smart to know
that when someone does something bad to
you it's stupid to seek revenge it's
stupid to say something bad about them
because the very good deeds you're
striving so hard to earn you're giving
them away for free without changing the
reality that when you back by someone is
that going to make that person love you
is that going to make them retract their
ill feelings towards you is that going
to retract their statements about you it
to retract their statements about you i
won'
so why would you give them your Deeds
for free why would you do that
for free why would you do tha
right so this is real quick and real you
know character Allah he tells in the
Quran that the true Scholars are those
that have the khashi of Allah and we see
tha
and if you want to see the level of your
party one of the best ways to do that to
see how you use your tongue how many
times do you curse how many times do you
back wait how many times do you say bad
things about other people
you want to see your level of knowledge
look at the actions of your tongue and
that is a great judge now I want to end
off with a funny story a nice story
when he passes away
he puts in his wasiya I do not want to
be buried in the land where the governor
is corrupt now why is this troubling
because
passes away he puts on this huge show oh
I'm so sad that Imam hanifa died may
Allah have mercy upon him and to honor
Imam
I want to be buried next to him so this
is what he says
foreign
so I mean I I don't even know where to
conclude like there's so much more that
conclude like there's so much more tha
can be said I wanted to make this as
beneficial in terms of lessons and to
try to share as many of the facts as I
could but again as I'll mentioned are
two resources for this class and the
company of the imams and our resource
for the Thursday night class and they
used a bit of it tonight as well the
four imams by uh Sheikh Muhammad
great resources to continue learning and
there's many other people that have done
um you know biographies of the imams so
please seek those out continue to learn
like for me personally this was an
amazing journey because it's a constant
amazing journey because it's a constan
reminder of how we should be striving to
lead our lives right we live in the
Dunya it's very easy to get distracted
by the Dunya and we need something to
remind us of how there were people that
remind us of how there were people tha
lived in this Dunya but still prioritize
the akhara
Allah was one of them and will continue
to see this reoccurring theme within the
next great imams so I pray that Allah
forgives Imam
for all the service that he's done to
this Dean that Allah does not prevent us
from the ajar that he will be giving his
followers and those that follow his way
grants us the taqwa the likes of Imam
the likes of Imam and greater than that
the likes of Imam and greater than tha
and that Allah instills in us the love
of our son of the loves of the prophet
of our son of the loves of the prophe
salallahu and all the prophets the love
of the Companions and he allows us to
follow their way in righteousness
[Music]